- The API layer is a common component
of a microservices architecture.
But, I want to start with a warning.
If you find your API layer is doing transformations
or executing logic,
you're doing it wrong
and you will eventually get yourself
into the same situation as exists for people in SOA.
I know there are products that allow you
to do transformative operations in an API layer.
But I highly encourage you
to not walk down that path.
My experience tells me
that this will never end well
for the overall health of your system,
or for the mental health of your development staff.
That being said, let's talk some
about what the API layer really is about.
We've talked now a couple of times
where the API layer is of a huge benefit
to the overall system health.
We're now going to get a little deeper.
In a pure microservices architecture,
an API layer is nothing more
than an aggregated proxy
of all of your service offerings.
The API layer is used to shield the outside world
or your clients from knowing the structure,
organization, or even what exact service
is exposing a specific operation
which is actually very useful.
The API layer provides a standardized proxy interface
that will expose whatever service endpoints
and API operations we configure it to expose.
We need to be careful here
that we aren't transforming the API's.
There's a better way to do that
for say a mobile client versus a desktop client.
The API layer is, in my opinion,
a pure proxy.
Consider our use cases around
scaling up our system under load
or scaling down under a lull.
If our service consumption model is one
in which we are bound directly to the hosts,
managing this infrastructure
becomes extremely painful,
especially across multiple data centers.
Now, there are some service discovery tools
that will aid in this process,
but in my opinion,
these are really nothing more than a synthetic API layer.
In this scaling model
the API layer isolates the client
from needing to know the direct IP address and port
of the service it's calling.
From the API layer,
we're calling hundreds of different endpoints
without really knowing which service
produces the endpoint itself.
Let's consider another use case
and that is isolation from change.
Regardless of whether we are strangling a monolith,
or refactoring a system that was developed
in an over-granular fashion.
If our first step is to implement an API layer,
clients will have minimal, if any, changes
to make in response to underlying refactoring
of the code base.
If every service is exposed through an API proxy layer,
you can break the services up
or aggregate them and simply have the proxy
configuration changed
to match the development operations.
The clients will not be impacted, period,
unless, of course, you make a breaking change.
I previously said not to make breaking API changes.
Instead to leverage versioning.
An API layer can assist you in versioning operations.
Now, I'm not going to be prescriptive
about how to handle version changes in your system,
because there's more than one valid way.
But, your API layer can help you
by directing to the legacy versions of a service
without forcing a client to make changes.
Even if the deployment model makes a change.
While the API layer is usually denoted
as being completely optional,
I find that it's one of the most crucial components
if you want to reduce the overall impact
of moving to this architecture model.
So please consider it.